nearly 3 years into the war in Ukraine
Russia's economy has largely defied the
Doomsday predictions that many
anticipated however in the past few
weeks the economic Outlook worsened
significantly as the kremlin's
extravagant military spending has begun
to exert considerable pressure on the
economy so in this video we're going to
explain why Russia's economy initially
seemed to have outperformed expectations
how its unprecedented defense spending
is now creating challenges and what
could happen next
[Music]
before we start if you haven't already
please consider subscribing and ringing
the bell to stay in the loop and be
notified when we release new videos so
the first thing to say here is that no
one knows precisely how the Russian
economy is performing because the
Russian authorities stopped publishing
much of their economic data after the
war in Ukraine kicked off and while the
Kremlin has resumed publishing some data
this often excludes unflattering figures
nonetheless the fact that estimates
financial institutions like the IMF and
the World Bank generally Accord with
rosat the Russian government statistical
agency suggest that at least when it
comes to the big macro numbers Russia's
internal data is broadly accurate so
let's have a look at how and why
Russia's economy has outperformed
expectations according to the Russian
Central Bank whilst Russia's GDP
declined by 1.2% in 2022 it returned to
growth in 2023 and GDP grew by 3 . 6%
this June the World Bank reported that
having already overtaken Germany Russia
has now also overtaken Japan to become
the fourth largest economy in the world
after China the US and India measured
according to purchasing power parity
moreover in July the World Bank upgraded
Russia from being an upper middle inome
to a High inome Country placing it in
the company of the G7 group of leading
industrialized economies now a lot of
this growth has been driven by extensive
military SP ending which the country was
able to do mainly because it had a lot
of fiscal space Before the War Began
this is because the Russian State really
wasn't spending or borrowing very much
money before the war so it could easily
increase spending to fund the war
additionally Russia is reaping
substantial profits from oil thanks both
to the relatively lack enforcement of
Western Energy sanctions and the general
rise in Energy prices post Ukraine so
with the state cashing in the Kremlin
has found it relatively easy to fund its
war and Russia's military spending has
increased steadily to about 7.9% of GDP
this year which accounts for nearly a
third of the federal budget however in
recent weeks rustat along with Russian
Business Leaders and economists have
warned against this unprecedented
military spending citing two reasons
firstly while military spending counts
towards GDP it's not good GDP per se say
because well you're just building tanks
only for them to get blown up
additionally Contracting solders to
fight in Ukraine many of whom will be
killed isn't really a good long-term
investment for the economy secondly and
more importantly though this massive
increase in government spending is
beginning to seriously strain the rest
of the economy exacerbating inflation
and overheating certain sectors for
context inflation which has been
gradually increasing is now expected to
Peak at 8.5% this year now when
sanctions were first imposed at the
start of the war many analysts believe
the subsequent drop in the ruble and
increased cost of imports would push
inflation to unprecedented Highs but
despite a brief Spike immediately after
the war when inflation reached 17.8% in
April 2022 a combination of an
appreciation in the rubble and sharp
interest rate hikes meant that inflation
fell relatively quickly but despite
having bottomed out at 2.3% last year
inflation has started Rising again and
is currently more than double the
central bank's 4% Target Western
economists have even highlighted that
the country's real inflation which is
inflation adjusted for purchasing power
is even higher at 27% in a statement
released last month the Central Bank
argued that high inflation is largely
the result of increased government
spending and a growing budget deficit
the bank added that further monetary
tightening is needed and as a result the
bank decided to hike interest rates
again this October to a record level of
21% this surpassed the emergency rate
level introduced back in February 2022 2
and marks the highest rate seen since
2003 unsurprisingly these hikes have had
a seriously detrimental impact on
business who have seen their borrowing
costs sore in a rare show of public
descent at an address to Russian
Senators this October the CEO of Defense
conglomerate rosc expressed concern that
record interest rates were eating up
profits he also warned that these high
borrowing costs could ultimately lead to
widespread bankruptcy rates which have
already surged by 20% this year High
interest rates have also had a negative
effect on the Russian stock market which
had dropped by 25% by the end of August
and the general uncertainty about the
state of the Russian economy has hurt
the ruble which has plunged to new lows
this October this is pretty remarkable
given that you would expect the ruble to
appreciate when interest rates go up
thanks to the increased attractiveness
of saving more generally other
businesses have reportedly complained
that the central bank's monetary policy
has pushed financing costs up to the
point they can't invest which is
undermining Russia's industrial capacity
however the Central Bank in defense of
its monetary policy has pointed to the
acute labor shortage in sectors where
Russia's military spending is being
directed over half a million workers
have now moved from the civilian sector
of the economy to defense related firms
which are offering higher wages and
benefits to entice more workers this has
pushed up wages in both sectors and it's
been predicted by Russia's labor
Ministry that the country will be
suffering a worker shortage of about 2.4
million workers by 2030 if current
trends continue here the risk for the
Kremlin is that the Russian economy
enters a sort of wage price spiral where
higher wages mean more inflation which
creates demand for higher wages Etc
there's already evidence that the
Russian economy is nearing that point
not only is inflation running very high
but the unemployment rate has also
reached a record low of
2.4% while low employment sounds good
2.4% is actually too low and a symptom
of significant labor shortages labor
shortages have already shown up in
specific sectors like construction which
have seen a sharp reduction in economic
activity and are the fundamental cause
of the rapid and ever increasing wage
growth Russia has seen over the past few
years furthermore according to Russia's
Central Bank and multiple International
bodies Russia's economic growth is
expected to slow down significantly next
year despite all this it looks like
Putin isn't planning to change course
anytime soon and defense expenditure is
expected to increase by almost 30% next
year unless there's a significant rise
in global Energy prices which could
significantly improve Russia's ability
to finance the war Russia's current
economic trajectory looks genuinely
unsustainable this is just one of many
major stories going on with 2024 marking
a major year for both news and elections
in fact with a majority of the world
heading to the polls 2024 has been a
pretty unique and important year so in
the latest issue of our magazine too
long we discussed these elections diving
deep into the 29 biggest elections of
the year making sure you understand what
really happened and commemorating one of
the biggest years in news we don't just
discuss elections though we also run
through China's trade issues Biden's
successes and failures the UK's new
opposition leader and the state of the
wars in Ukraine and Gaza plus the fact
it's a magazine also means we're not
constrained by the time limits or
algorithms imposed by YouTube unlike
fleeting news cycles and algorithmic
feeds Tong offers thought-provoking
analysis and comprehensive coverage
that's truly worth holding purchasing is
also a great way to support the channel
running tldr this year has cost just
under 800,000 so if you've enjoyed our
coverage in 2024 then picking up a copy
of twoo long doesn't just get you high
quality reporting it also allows you to
invest in independent journalism and
join us in shaping the future of news if
you're convinced you have three more
decisions to make first do you want a
physical or digital copy the physical is
a highquality 60-page perfect band
magazine shipped right to your door the
digital is slightly cheaper especially
if shipping is a concern your second
choice is the standard or Premium
Edition the standard is just a copy of
the magazine while premium also gets you
access to our monthly behind the-scenes
podcast the bullpen where we break down
all of the production of too long and
tldr more generally and you'll get your
name printed in the thank you section of
the magazine finally do you want to
subscribe if you do you'll get a copy of
two long every 4 months meaning you'll
never miss an issue plus you'll also get
25% off every copy as long as you stay
subscribed if you can subscribing also
gives us a reliable income stream which
is super useful for us regardless of
which option you choose you can buy a
copy right now at to long. newws or
click the link in the description thanks
for your support and thanks for backing
too long